the US media is reporting that Secretary
of State Anthony blinkin is heading to
the Middle East next week to discuss the
war on Gaza his visit comes as Israel
expands its ground offensive targeting
areas in Central and Southern Gaza
Regional mediator Egypt has put forward
a three-stage plan to end the violence
but that's yet to be accepted by either
Hamas or
Israel let's bring in Natalie toi now
she's a director of The Institute AAR
International she's the former special
adviser to EU Foreign Affairs heads
feder Morini and Jose barell she joins
us from kir now welcome to the program
firstly where do you think we are now in
terms of any possible brokering of a
ceasefire well I mean I think you know
the Israeli government um and more
broadly the military establishment has
made it uh quite clear that it does not
intend to to stop this War uh and so I
think the next question question is you
know sort of who and what is um actually
putting pressure on the Israeli
government to change course now you know
we were just listening a moment ago to
uh demonstrations within Israel it seems
to me that um as was was being discussed
you know this is still a very small
minority in the country so the pressure
is still not really building up within
Israel of course there is the question
of the hostage release and that is and
has a dynamic of itself own but you
still can't see it reaching that Tipping
Point um in terms of actually getting
the government to change course um now
sadly you don't even see much of a
change taking place uh within the United
States let's see what uh Tony blinkin uh
brings when he comes to uh to the region
um however up until now Beyond obviously
you know calls in terms of uh reducing
indiscriminate bombing uh and more
broadly the intensity of the war we have
not seen the United States actually call
for a ceasefire um and so you know at
the moment basically you you know
obviously there is the question of of
Egypt and I think it's interesting the
way in which Egypt has rather recently
been stepping up uh more more visibly
and obviously there there will be a
dynamic between Egypt and the United
States um which will increase pressure
on Washington to push Israel uh towards
a ceasefire because of course as we know
the longer this war goes on and the
greater the pressure it will be in terms
of actually getting to essentially an
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians uh
moving into Egypt from Gaza which of
course is what Egypt wants to avoid
right you mentioned the dynamic there I
what about the dynamic between US
President Joe Biden and uh Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu how is that
likely to play out
now well I mean you know so far
basically you know the United States as
we know has um embraced the sort of be
hug approach which Frankly Speaking has
not really delivered so far um and um at
the moment as I said you know you don't
really see much of a change happening
yet uh in the United States now of
course as the US heads into its uh
presidential campaign uh I think there
will be an increasing pressure within
the United States and on the Biden
Administration in fact Biden himself
will probably want this war to end
sooner rather than later but as I said
you know at the moment we don't really
see much beyond words and words Frankly
Speaking on this Israeli government
don't really seem to be having much of
an effect and after months of of War
does the Israeli military have much to
show really for its bombardment of
civilians well no I mean it has
absolutely nothing to show right I mean
you know here we are sort of two and a
half months into this war and there has
not been um you know any visible quote
unquote trophy basically to to show for
meaning there has not been any uh sort
of senior Hamas leader uh being uh uh
taken or killed uh by uh by Israel so
very clearly um you know Hamas remains
you know sort of in control of of parts
of Gaza so very clearly none of the
objectives that Israel had set out for
itself beginning with the quote unquote
eradication of Hamas have actually been
accomplished and of course the longer
this War goes on and in many respects
the weaker Israel appears now the
question then though is does this
actually increase Israel's incentives to
continue or to pull back and uh
tragically it actually you know the the
worse it gets yeah the less likely
Israel is to achieve its objectives the
less likely it will be to want to pull
back in the sense that obviously pulling
back now will obviously very clearly be
seen as a demonstration of failure
and when it comes to other outside
actors then what about the European
Union and and and other Gulf countries
how much leverage do they really
have well I mean the European Union has
and you know I I speak as a very sort of
you know committed uh europeanist I mean
you know sort of down to the bone um but
I really cannot um sort of deny the fact
that uh Europe has really put on a
fairly sorry show over over this war um
and in two respects I would say I mean
firstly because Europe is and continues
to be terribly divided you know we've
seen this basically in the two uh
consecutive votes that we've had at the
UN General Assembly uh on uh on the war
in which for on on both occasions
basically Europe was split in three
between countries supporting the
ceasefire countries abstaining and
countries uh rejecting it so Europe is
basically divided and what we see is in
a sense a similar pattern to what we
have been used to in the past I.E
Europeans essentially following a US
lead now of course the problem there is
that whereas Once Upon a Time the United
States was the indispensable power that
was actually able to deliver results
today while it Remains the indispensable
power it doesn't seem to be able to
dispense much much at all right and let
me ask you then what about forgive me
for jumping in there but what about
Benjamin netanyahu's position is he
essentially playing a long game as it
were yes I mean absolutely I mean I
think sort of here there is um a broad
convergence I would say although coming
probably from different interests
between uh Benjamin Netanyahu himself
and the broader political military
establishment so whereas in the case of
netan there's very clearly an interest
in remaining in power and therefore a
avoiding elections given that if Israel
were to move to elections very likely uh
Netanyahu would be removed from power
and so in a sense the only uh sort of
opportunity that he has is on the one
hand to prolong this war hoping of
course that if one manages not obviously
at this level of intensity but if one
manages to continue for a number of
months and perhaps you know almost into
a year from now and miraculously for Mid
Nano Donald Trump were to return to the
White House
maybe he could actually be the Eternal
Phoenix sort of rising from From the
Ashes so I would say as far as nany's
concerned there very clearly is an
interest in a long War as far as the
Israeli military establishment is
concerned I think here the interest is
somewhat different although it's
convergent and it basically boils down
to the fact that of course the 7th of
October was an absolute failure right
for uh for Israel and so there is a very
strong interest in the military
establishment to basically demonstrate
that it can somehow flip uh the tables
uh around and as as we were discussing
earlier so far there actually hasn't
been much of a military result to show
for which is basically why the military
establishment at the moment inevitably
has an interest in continuing this war
okay we'll leave it there Natalie toi
thank you very much indeed for your
insights great talking to you